SOURCE: The Daily Californian (student opinion) — "My experience living in Berkeley Student Cooperative housing"
URL: https://www.dailycal.org/archives/my-experience-living-in-berkeley-student-cooperative-housing/article_c20e722e-bb04-58a8-8697-d797ae3e10c3.html
AUTHOR: Samantha Herrera
TYPE: First-person student experience
TOPIC: Berkeley Student Cooperative (co-op) living, Cloyne Court

My experience living in Berkeley Student Cooperative housing
By Samantha Herrera

This past fall, I moved into Cloyne Court, one of the biggest Berkeley co-ops. The Berkeley Student Cooperative is a series of 17 houses on campus designed to provide housing for low-income Bay Area students, each with a specific theme and living environment. Often, for those from a low-income background, the co-ops are one of the only forms of housing available for us to keep studying at UC Berkeley and in the Bay at large. Coming back from a year online and moving into a new house, I was a little bit terrified. I didn't know what to expect and hadn't even visited the house before I signed my housing contract since it was the only viable housing option for me.

Through this past semester, I got adjusted to living in a co-op environment, and it dispelled a lot of the myths I was worried about. My co-op isn't as unclean as I expected it to be, especially after hearing horror stories about sticky carpets and pest infestations in others. Most of the time, our bathrooms and common areas are pretty clean and well kept, but if people choose to skip their work shifts around midterm season, it could become a little disheveled. The floor in my room looks a little bit worse for wear, but I put a rug over it, so it doesn't bother me that much anymore.

In each co-op house, all tenants are required to complete five work shifts a week in exchange for cheaper rent, which means that all of the cleanings that go into maintaining the house are done by students. When I originally signed up for the co-ops, five hours of work a week didn't seem like much, but it was a little overwhelming at first, especially with my part-time work-study job and the demanding officer position I had for a large club. Over time, though, I did get used to my permanent work shifts and sometimes even enjoyed getting to step away from my homework to clear my mind and wash dishes for an hour.

In terms of food, most co-ops provide six dinners a week, except the co-op apartments, which are on a different housing contract. For daily dinners, most are not that bad, but it ultimately depends on who the head cook making dinner is that day. If you end up missing the scheduled dinner time, which can be common for those with nightly club meetings, most co-ops have fully stocked kitchens to make your own dinner. Although it was admittedly hard for me since I am terrible at cooking, you can also have friends grab you dinner at the house as well if you are unable to make it. Usually, my co-op has a ton of vegetarian options for dinner instead of meat-based meals, so I definitely got used to the taste of tofu after a while.

The people at the co-ops are extremely kind and supportive. Although I didn't have much time to make friends in the house this past semester, there are usually people who are willing to say hello and talk to you while waiting for our communal dinners, which I always thought was sweet. Although co-op living takes some time to get adjusted to, it's not as bad as some people might think. I can certainly say that I have been enjoying my experience in my co-op much more than I thought I would.
